# Quantized LoRA

QLoRA is an attempt to further optimize finetuning of LLMs by doing it directly on quantized LLMs and letting the gradient updates happen to the LoRA adapters.

### Quick overview of LoRA

LoRA is a technique to perform finetuning of LLMs without having to perform gradient updates on the entire parameter set (rather a much, much smaller subset).

It makes use of the assumption that the change of weights matrix ($\Delta W$) for each layer in an LLM has a low rank. Formally, if a weight matrix in an LLM is $W_{a \times b}$,

\\[rank(\Delta W_{a \times b}) \ll a, b\\]

This can be exploited by creating smaller matrices $A_{a \times h}$ and $B_{h \times b}$ (where $h \ll a, b$) that act as adapters for gradients to flow through them. The output of the layer then can be calculated as -

\\[Y = XW + XAB\\]

Where the weights in W are kept frozen, while A and B are updated.

### Quick overview of Quantization

With Quantization, we attempt to reduce the precision required per parameter value to save memory/speed up calculations, without sacrificing the information per bit too much. This is generally done through scaling floats within a discretized range, while taking care of outliers by doing it in a block-wise fashion. Not going into the details here, link attached below.

Quantization significantly speeds up inference of models and makes them more accessible to a wide range of machines (even raspberry pis somehow). However finetuning a quantized LLM results in a significantly decreased performance compared to finetuning pre-quantization (which is obviously more expensive and inaccessible).

### QLoRA

Quantized LLMs can be combined with LoRA adapters 🥳

Essentially, QLoRA uses 2 precision types - 4 bit for storage (general transformer weights) and 16 bit for computation (through dequantization). 
The gradients are only computed for the LoRA adapters which use 16 bit always. Computationally - 

\\[Y^{16} = X^{16} dequant'(W^4) + X^{16} A^{16} B^{16}\\]

Where the superscripts represent the representation. (The $dequant'$ function is not the standard dequantization, and is explained further on here.)

### Tricks used

The paper highlights some tricks and optimizations used for preserving memory and improving precision.


[TODO]
