# Talking to GPUs

For raw interactions with GPUs, you generally use a rather vendor specific dialect of a programming language to
write "shaders". This can be CUDA for Nvidia, MSL for Apple Silicon, HIP for AMD, etc. But why is there no one
language that compiles down to different GPU ISAs using something like LLVM?

#### GPU ISAs

CPU ISAs comprise mostly of general purpose instructions that are heavily portable over different vendors - e.g. Intel and
AMD both have CPUs that support x86_64 (there are vendor specific instructions, but not a lot).

In the case of GPUs, the ISA is a lot closer to the hardware implementation for optimization purposes.
This causes modern GPU ISAs to be extremely complicated - and in some cases the vendors dont even release them
for each GPU cycle.

This puts the onus of implementing both a compiler frontend and a backend on the vendor, hence the vendor-specific
language dialects. However, even these dialects can have differing implementations based on the hardware provider!
It ends up being a big mess of transpilers and compilers.

#### A step towards unification: SPIR-V

SPIR stands for Standard Portable Intermediate Representation (The V is for Vulkan, but that's not important).

To ease the propagation of bugs and inconsistencies, this unified IR (Intermediate Representation) was created.
Its job is to offload the frontend optimizations to something like LLVM, while the backend optimizations can still be done by the vendor,
in an API that takes SPIR-V as input. Its adoption is still not very widespread, but that is a blog-post for another day.
