# Busy Beavers

Nerd-sniped by a half cooked math hackernews comment, I spent a few hours writing and visualizing a busy beaver simulator. Anyways, the theory is much cooler.

### What is a Busy Beaver number

It's a `finite` number that represents the maximum number of steps a Turing machine with `n` states can take before halting.
The Busy Beaver function is denoted as `BB(n)`.

BB(1) = 1, BB(2) = 4, BB(3) = 6, BB(4) = 13, BB(5) = 47176870

BB(6) had an earlier lower bound of $10^{18267}$ which has since been updated to be [far, far larger](https://www.reddit.com/r/math/comments/xz7si4/%CF%836_the_6th_busy_beaver_number_is_far_larger_than/).

### Why is it interesting

BB increases quick, in fact it is the fastest increasing function possible. Why?

Let's say there exists another function (F) which upper bounds BB. Which implies that for any turing machine with `k` states, you
can say that it will run for a maximum number of `F(k)` steps before halting. If it runs for more than that, you can conclude
that the machine must never halt.

This sounds an awful lot like a solution for the halting problem, which Turing proved to be undecidable in 1936.

### BB(6) is so big, imagine how big BB(1000) will be!

We'll actually never know. Not because it is too big, but because we simply cannot compute it even with infinite time and memory.

Some crazy people have actually brought the upper bound for the largest BB number we can compute down to just 747.
Which means that we cannot ever compute BB(748).

A turing machine with 748 states doesn't sound like much at all - and [here it is](https://turingmachinesimulator.com/shared/vgimygpuwi).

### Why will BB(748) disprove our mathematics

[ZFC](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Zermelo%E2%80%93Fraenkel_set_theory) is the standard set of axioms that we base our mathematics on. It is a set of axioms that we believe
to be consistent and can be used to prove all the theorems we have proven so far, and more.

What does it mean for a set of axioms to be consistent? - it means that using this set, we should never be
able to prove both a statement and its negation.

Godel proved that if ZFC is in fact consistent, it will never be able to prove its own consistency. This
is Godel's [second incompleteness theorem](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G%C3%B6del%27s_incompleteness_theorems).

Now let's say we have a turing machine that takes the axioms present in ZFC and starts enumerating all the provable statements
one by one. By Godel's theorem, ZFC can't prove if this machine will ever halt (as halting would imply ZFC proving its consistency). The authors
managed to bring the number of states required to build such a machine down to just 748 - which means that if
via ZFC we ever could calculate BB(748), we could just run this machine for BB(748) number of steps and prove ZFC's consistency.

It blows my mind that this is a finite number by definition, that we can never compute without disproving our entire mathematical
foundation!
